# infodemics1
This is repository for data and code of the manuscript "Using ‘infodemics’ to understand public awareness and perception of SARS-CoV-2: an analysis of online information about COVID-19 incidence and mortality during a major outbreak in Vietnam, July - September 2020"
Authors: Ha-Linh Quach1,2, Thai Quang Pham1,3, Ngoc-Anh Hoang1,2, Dinh Cong Phung4, Viet-Cuong Nguyen5, Son Hong Le6, Thanh Cong Le7, Thu Minh Thi Bui8, Dang Hai Le1, Anh Duc Dang9, Duong Nhu Tran9, Nghia Duy Ngu1, Florian Vogt2,10, Cong-Khanh Nguyen1,11
Affiliations:
1Department of Communicable Diseases Control, National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Vietnam
2National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Research School of Population Health, College of Health and Medicine, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia
3Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, School of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam
4National Agency for Science and Technology Information, Ministry of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
5HPC SYSTEMS Inc., Tokyo, Japan
6CMetric JSC Inc., Hanoi, Vietnam
7INFORE Technology Inc., Hanoi, Vietnam
8Department of Health Communication and Reward, Ministry of Health, Hanoi, Vietnam
9National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Vietnam
10The Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
11Field Epidemiology Training Program, National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Vietnam
Data collection
Inclusion criteria for online content were: (i) related to COVID-19 incidence or mortalities (identified through pre-defined keywords in Table S1); (ii) posts were published in ‘public mode’ and remained in the public domain at the time of data collection; (iii) posts were made and posted in the format of posts on social media networks, entries on online forums, and online newspaper contributions; (iv) the geographical area from where the posts were uploaded is Vietnam. Exclusion criteria were: (i) being unrelated to the study topic (i.e. not containing pre-defined keywords in Table S1); (ii) not being in the public domain at time of collection; and (iii) not generated in Vietnam geographically.
We used the software package “Social Media Command Center” used by the Vietnam Ministry of Science and Technology for online data collection. This software has been routinely used by National Steering Committee of COVID-19 Prevention in Vietnam since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic to assess public understanding and perception of public health interventions. Data source for collection included public social media networks, popular online forums, and leading online newspapers in Vietnam (Table S2) (“100 largest social media and forums in Vietnam”; Vietnam Yellow Page; Wikipedia; Quoc Khanh, 2020). Based on a pre-identified keyword search to cover the study topics (Table S1), we extracted the following data from each included online posts: (i) source, (ii) influence score, (iii) date of posting, (iv) engagement level, (v) sentiment polarity and (vi) content (Table S3). Influence score was categorized through number of followers and/or views of source of posting (Table S4), and sentiment polarity was processed and categorize into sentiment based on Vietnamese Lexicon Sentimental Dictionary developed by Tran et al (Tran & Phan, 2018) (Table S3). 
Data processing
We used the Vietnamese word segmentation package “VnCoreNLP” packages (Vu et al., 2018) on Python 3.8 to segment words in each post, then processed to delete Vietnamese stop words and clean special symbols.
Data analysis
We plotted the number of posts and number of COVID-19 incidence and mortality by date to explore awareness and perception with regards to the Da Nang outbreak over time. Variables were summarized by frequency and percentage, and differentiated between the three outbreak periods (before, during, and after the outbreak) by Chi square or Fisher’s exact tests. We summarized the influence score by calculating means and standard deviations (SD). We used the Spearman correlation coefficient to explore the correlation between COVID-19 incidence and mortality reported in Vietnam with the number of posts over time. We used multinomial logistic regression to assess the predictive relationship between sentiment polarity and outbreak periods adjusted for the posts’ variables, reporting odds rations (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). We used zero inflated Poisson regression to explore the relationship between engagement levels and outbreak periods adjusted for the posts’ variables, reporting relative risks (RR), robust standard errors (SE) and 95%CI. These analyses were performed in Stata 16.0.
From the word segmentation, we calculated word frequencies to identify high-frequency keywords stratified by the three outbreak periods using the “NLTK” software package (Bird, Klein & Loper, 2009). After extracting the most common words in each topic, we constructed a word-word co-occurrence matrix using “NetworkX” (Hagberg, Swart & S Chult, 2008) in Python 3.8. We then extracted the matrix to VOSViewer software (Van Eck & Waltman, 2010) to create a network of word co-occurrence analysis and cluster analysis, by using the co-occurrence frequency as the edge weight, and word frequency as node weight. In the network, the larger the size of the nodes would be, the higher number of links the node would have with its neighbours. The connection between the nodes would indicate that the keywords on the two nodes had appeared together, the stronger the connection would be, the higher the frequency of word co-occurrence and the closer the connection would be between the nodes. Nodes of the same cluster in each network were grouped by colour. 
